The meeting was chaired by Dr Nadia Teleb Badr (Regional Adviser, Vaccine Preventable Diseases and Immunization, WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean, Cairo) and Professor Brian Greenwood (London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) (see Annex 1 for the agenda and Annex 2 for the list of participants).
Dr Teleb opened the meeting by highlighting the progress made in controlling meningitis from the time of the call by African governments in 1996 for an affordable vaccine1 to the successes of the Meningitis Vaccine Project with the MenAfriVac vaccine against disease caused Neisseria meningitidis serogroup A bacteria in the meningitis belt in Africa.
Dr Martin Friede (Coordinator, Initiative for Vaccine Research, WHO) emphasized the importance of the initiative to defeat meningitis by 2030 and of the meeting for WHO. It contributes to the achievement of the three goals of WHO’s Thirteenth General Programme of Work (2019-2023), which focus on promoting health, keeping the world safe and serving the vulnerable. Vaccines have been the cornerstone of ensuring healthier lives, with vaccination having a highly-favourable cost- benefit ratio. The hardest task has been getting vaccines to where they were needed. WHO has depended on global experts to design strategies and plans for defeating meningitis.Dr Marie-Pierre Preziosi (Medical Officer and Lead Flagship Projects, Initiative for Vaccine Research, WHO) outlined the scope and objectives of the meeting and the process for developing a roadmap (see Annex 3 for WHO’s concept note). The aims are to: learn from other experiences and approaches to developing roadmaps, identifying expectations and potential contributions to the process; discuss the baseline situation of meningitis and explore the way forward; and determine the next steps. The meeting would also consider terms of reference of the Technical Taskforce and the attribution of roles and responsibilities.

Meningitis is a devastating disease and remains a major global public health challenge. Together with sepsis it is estimated to cause more deaths in children under 5 years of age than malaria. Survivors can suffer severe sequelae with considerable social and economic costs. Vaccines are available against three main bacterial causes of meningitis (Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus influenzae type b). There is no vaccine yet against disease caused by with group B streptococci (Streptococcus agalactiae). Furthermore, vaccine introduction and coverage are variable especially in lower- and middle-income countries. The burden of meningitis falls mainly on the poorest countries.
Two meetings in 20172 issued calls for a global vision and the defeat of meningitis by 2030. The WHO Secretariat acknowledged the global relevance of this approach, arguing at the same time for the need to recognize regional specificities. Its work on meningitis is fully aligned with the objectives of the Organization’s Thirteenth General Programme of Work (2019-2023). WHO’s regional offices for Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean have jointly developed an immunization business case for the African Continent,3 which was launched in May 2018 at a technical briefing during the Seventy-first World Health Assembly and for which ambition is high that all high-risk countries will have eliminated outbreaks of meningitis by 2030.
The Secretariat proposes to create a roadmap comprising a clear vision and strategic goals, defined milestones and agreed priorities for research and enhanced control activities. Its scope will be global, with strategies tailored to each region as relevant, building on collaboration and the work already done in WHO’s African and Eastern Mediterranean regions, and it will include a business case. The process for its development will be (1) finalizing the baseline situation analysis, (2) drafting the roadmap, and (3) holding iterative technical and public consultations. The Technical Taskforce will be responsible for developing the baseline situation analysis, drafting the roadmap, and supporting cycles of review and synthesis
This initial Technical Task Force is a consortium of major technical partners historically invested in long-term meningitis control, particularly in the African region, with complementary focus and expertise.

Members of the Technical Taskforce reviewed the lessons learnt from the development of previous roadmaps. One common issue was the need to be consistent in the use of terminology relating to concepts of disease control, eradication, elimination or elimination as a public health problem.
The World Health Assembly has adopted many resolutions and decisions on the prevention and control of infectious diseases, including conditions relevant to meningitis such as pneumonia and sepsis. Some have urged elimination and eradication. In 1997 its resolution on elimination of lymphatic filariasis as a public health problem included the concept of disease prevention with mass drug administration and recognized the socio-economic impact of the disease4 and the need to reduce suffering. In several instances, the Secretariat has responded by establishing technical taskforces, instigating broad partnerships. Several of these groups developed global strategies containing defined goals, strategic objectives and specific indicators (sometime national or regional), timelines and monitoring mechanisms.
WHO has amassed a considerable body of expertise and created, working with partners, numerous global action plans, roadmaps and strategies for achieving public health goals. Elements include roadmaps for accelerating work on neglected tropical diseases,5 malaria vaccine technology,6 and ending cholera by 2030.7 For example, the roadmap for neglected tropical diseases sets multiple targets, including eradication, elimination (both at global and regional levels) and control of diseases, but also includes targets and indicators for reducing suffering and improving quality of life.
The World Health Assembly has also adopted or endorsed global strategies for prevention and control (for instance on water and air pollution and viral hepatitis), strategic plans (measles and rubella), other roadmaps (for example, on childhood tuberculosis) and action plans (for instance, the global vaccine action plan (2011-2020) and those on pneumonia and diarrhoea). Since 2015, the goals of all the plans have been linked to the goals in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The roadmap on ending cholera by 2030 was developed through a long-standing partnership, the Global Task Force on Cholera Control. The choice of the word “ending” in its title was deliberate, in order to have greater impact in communication with the public. The roadmap included consideration of costs, and stressed early detection and containment of outbreaks, with clear goals, linked with other Sustainable Development Goals besides Goal 3 on health. Its development was rapid (six months), owing to strong engagement and support from partners, short-term recruitment of dedicated staff, adaptation of existing materials where possible, formulation of key communication messages, and the creation of a small core group to guide the process and review materials. The roadmap was featured in a side event at the Seventieth World Health Assembly in May 2017 and given a prominent launch in October that year, followed by the adoption of resolution WHA71.4 on cholera prevention and control by the Seventy-first World Health Assembly in May 2018.8 Challenges remaining to be overcome include fitting responses to emergencies within long-term programmes, coordination, costing the strategy, implementation (including resource mobilization) and WHO’s internal processes.
The roadmap on malaria vaccine technology was developed with substantial support from international partners, engendering a good sense of ownership. The process involved intense but long consultations, with continued meetings of the global funders’ group, ensuring coherence, and WHO assuming a coordinating role. The roadmap set strategic goals and priority areas, including research, key capacities, policy and commercialization issues (as well as related regulatory concerns). The original version was updated through a public consultation process and technical consultations. Challenges faced included the lack of a centralized decision-making authority, the need for different levels of coordination, failure to get government agencies to agree, and the need to distinguish translational research from product development.
Comments to emerge in discussion included the need to document progress, to ensure that achievements were sustained, to pay close and early attention to the consequences of meningitis, to analyse the reasons for success or failure of various strategies and action plans, and how to respond when targets were not being met. A balance had to be struck between aspirational and realistic targets. Costing was a vital element. Another essential factor was country ownership; Member States needed to be engaged from the outset. One member of the Taskforce observed that the experience with the introduction of MenAfriVac (a conjugate vaccine against N. meningitidis serogroup A meningococcal disease) in the sub-Saharan meningitis belt demonstrated that some countries can own their surveillance activities. It was noted that meningitis could be a vehicle to direct attention to other actions such as control of sepsis, pneumonia and outbreaks of other infectious diseases.

Representatives of six member organizations of the Technical Taskforce as well as WHO temporary advisers and subject matter specialists expressed their views on, and expectations of, the roadmap.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America) supports the development of the roadmap. It offers technical support though its expertise in disease control and surveillance. In particular, it is a leading partner in MenAfriNet, an international consortium that includes the Agence de Médicine Préventive, African health ministries and WHO. The consortium works to strengthen meningitis surveillance in five countries in sub-Saharan Africa so as to evaluate the impact of MenAfriVac on the incidence of meningococcal disease due to N. meningitidis serogroup A as well as to monitor the emergence of disease and epidemics due to other serogroups. CDC and the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH, Oslo, Norway) are leading a study in Burkina Faso (see below). CDC’s Bacterial Meningitis Laboratory also serves as a WHO Collaborating Centre for Meningitis, monitoring the global spread of virulent strains of meningococci using molecular methods and building capacity, particularly in Africa.The work of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (London, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) on meningitis includes the coordination of the African Meningococcal Carriage Consortium, which focused on patterns of meningococcal carriage in seven countries in the sub-Saharan meningitis belt. The transfer of the Medical Research Council Unit in The Gambia to the School in May 2018 strengthens its work on meningitis, immunization and maternal and child health programmes in The Gambia.


The Meningitis Research Foundation (Bristol, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) advocates for people, families and patient’s needs. Its vision is a world free from meningitis and septicaemia, with the specific goal of eliminating both as a public health problem. It called on the Taskforce to adopt a person-centred approach to its work, focusing on vaccination as well as improved diagnosis and treatment, support and aftercare for survivors of meningitis with sequelae; better data for advocacy and decision-making: information and advocacy capacity; adaptation of other public health business cases; and clear prioritization and phasing of actions with clear definition of roles. With the target date of 2030 - only 12 years away - action is needed urgently.In their work on progressing towards ensuring no more vaccine-preventable meningitis, Médecins sans Frontières (MSF) and the MSF Epicentre in Paris have been involved deeply in work on strategy development, protocols, vaccination and access to vaccines, earlier and better treatment, early decentralized diagnosis (with quality assurance of diagnostics) and advocacy for more than 10 years. MSF provides a reality check on aspirations, seeking what can be achieved feasibly and defining both short-term and long-term goals. MSF emphasizes that any global strategy should reflect the fact that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to outbreak control.In 2001, PATH (Seattle, Washington, United States of America) partnered with WHO to establish the Meningitis Vaccine Project to eliminate epidemic meningitis due to N. meningitidis serogroup A in sub-Saharan Africa through the development, testing, introduction and widespread use of conjugate meningococcal vaccines. PATH led the pharmaceutical, clinical and regulatory development work that resulted in the licensing and prequalification of MenAfriVac, which has been used so successfully in the African meningitis belt. It is trying to replicate that success for a vaccine covering serogroups A, C, W, X and Y of N. meningitidis, to develop affordable conjugate and protein-based vaccines against S. pneumoniae, and to develop a low-cost conjugate vaccine against infection with group B streptococci (S. agalactiae) to prevent neonatal sepsis and meningitis.UNICEF is focusing on supply-side aspects of meningococcal vaccines, detailing market situations and providing information on difficulties in supply and demand. It also works on programmatic issues, for instance demand creation, risk communication, and the use of vaccines in outbreak control. UNICEF supports the development of the roadmap, and advised to invest in conducting health economic studies to assess the impact of meningitis on national economies. The roadmap should demonstrate how introduction of a meningitis vaccine could support the use of other routine vaccines and improve vaccination coverage. Its remit should be broadened to cover neonatal health and related topics.For more than 20 years, the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH, Oslo, Norway) has been designated a WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on meningococci. It contributes to diagnostic and outbreak confirmation in various countries (including a recent outbreak in Kazakhstan), monitoring world-wide spread of virulent strains of meningococci using molecular methods, and building capacity, particularly in Africa. NIPH is working on better rapid diagnostic tests, laboratory diagnosis, disease burden studies and vaccines. It has also been leading a study with CDC in Burkina Faso to monitor the ability of vaccination with MenAfriVac to reduce the prevalence of carriage of N. meningitidis and so limit transmission of the meningococcal disease as well as examining the impact of vaccination with MenAfriVac.The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation invested heavily in the Meningitis Vaccine Project, which resulted in MenAfriVac, a N. meningitidis serogroup A vaccine that was introduced at the initial cost of less than US$ 0.5 a dose. The Foundation is now supporting routine MenAfriVac introduction and surveillance networks for the meningitis belt. Its Global Health Programme includes work to reduce deaths in children from pneumonia, neonatal sepsis and meningitis due to many of the pathogens covered by the proposed roadmap. The focus is global, it being noted that in the USA, following introduction of a 13-valent pneumococcal vaccine, group B streptococci are the largest cause of meningitis in under 5s. Through an innovative arrangement, the Foundation is supporting a multinational pharmaceutical company to develop a vaccine against group B streptococci. It is also contributing support to PATH in the development of a pentavalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine by an Indian manufacturer for use in Africa. Although progress was being made, challenges to be faced include the necessarily large size of clinical trials and more work on correlates of protection. The Foundation supports studies to improve herd protection with pneumococcal vaccines including the need for a booster dose, novel vaccination regimens and reduced-dose schedules.The Foundation is also funding a surveillance programme in India to detect meningitis pathogens in cerebrospinal fluid through PCR assays, with whole genome sequencing in regional reference laboratories.Other concerns of the Foundation include availability and accessibility of vaccines and, for treatment, antimicrobial resistance. More generally, there is concern that, with meningitis becoming increasingly concentrated in the poorest countries, the attention of donors on this condition may decline.Work is being done at the University of Cambridge (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland) on modelling the burden of meningitis, vaccine strategies and the impact of vaccination, in particular against meningococcal infection, with additional work on group B streptococcal infections. Reliable data are essential if the results of modelling studies are to be credible; hence considerable efforts should be made to improve the accuracy of data on the burden of meningitis and related infections, including better definition of burden. The focus of any roadmap should be global and not restricted to WHO’s African and Eastern Mediterranean regions.Currently, WHO’s work is mainly divided between headquarters and the regional offices for Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean, but the need to form linkages with the four other regional offices in order to provide a global response is recognized. Country ownership is vital; one way to encourage that would be to broaden the membership of the Taskforce to encompass additional experts from some countries where meningococcal disease is a significant concern. In the WHO African Region concerns about the re-emergence of N. meningitidis serogroup C are fuelling the push to develop multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines. Concerned Member States outside the meningitis belt need to consider including the serogroup A vaccine in routine immunization programmes. Other priorities include better detection and response to outbreaks, with increased availability of rapid diagnostic tests for use at points of care, and a people-centred approach building on experience with serogroup A.The WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region suffers the second largest burden of meningococcal disease globally. Its Member States include low- and middle-income countries, and sustainability of programmes is of great relevance in this Region. Some 70% of children in these countries have no access to a vaccine against S. pneumoniae and generally poor access to diagnostics and adequate treatment. Serotype-specific meningitis burden data are lacking. Few countries can provide aftercare for survivors of meningitis with sequelae. The Regional Office proposes inclusion in the roadmap of: clear goals; identified factors that have led to success or failure; investment needs; better data, especially on sequelae and disease burden; guidance on clinical management; and attribution of under-5 mortality and morbidity to meningitis.Work at WHO headquarters follows the outcomes of the Wilton Park meeting and reflects the goals and objectives of WHO’s Thirteenth General Programme of Work. The Secretariat is endeavouring to expand the focus from the two regions principally engaged in meningitis control to the global level and putting meningitis on the global public health agenda. The R&D Blueprint9 has helped to set a precedent for work on new tools and introducing them more rapidly. The Organization’s convening mandate is a powerful asset, together with the involvement and input of regional and country offices. In order to ensure country ownership, the political engagement of Member States can be encouraged through WHO’s governing bodies, with use of the regional committees and their annual sessions as the first level of entry. The need for a rapid and concentrated effort, emulating the progress of the Global Technical Task Force on Cholera, was underlined.Comments during the open discussion period recognized that expanding the focus to the global level would need more resources. One route to raising the necessary awareness was through politicians, for whom meningitis commanded attention; the example was given of Burkina Faso, where the President receives monthly updates on the meningitis situation. The need to gather perfect data on the actual burden of disease was balanced against the need to invest into other priorities. Realistic figures seem essential for forecasting demand for vaccines and identifying optimum approaches for introducing vaccines.Meningitis should be viewed as the severe end of the spectrum of infection with many of the pathogens that cause meningitis concerned, and treatment and efforts to prevent and control meningitis will have broad-ranging effects. Another issue was the role of Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and how currently eligible countries would cope once their development rendered them ineligible for its support.The running down of support for polio services in countries such as Nigeria where the burden of meningitis is high raises fears of a decline in the quality of data, surveillance and laboratory systems in that country.

Before the meeting members of the Taskforce had prepared five draft documents to create a baseline situation analysis, providing the foundation for the proposed roadmap. These background documents cover: global and regional burden of disease; diagnosis and surveillance; treatment and prophylaxis; vaccines and vaccination; and information and support. Elaboration of the baseline analysis should outline the main public health policies for meningitis and its sequelae, recommended practices and implementation status, barriers to implementation of policy, R&D priorities, and the main gaps in policy implementation, knowledge and R&D between where we are and where we want to be.After extensive discussion, members of the Taskforce agreed that the roadmap should focus on the four main bacteria responsible for vaccine-preventable meningitis for which vaccines are available or likely to become so in the foreseeable future. Other bacteria and pathogens that cause meningitis (viruses, fungi and parasites) should not be excluded when goals and strategies are generalizable, especially in terms of information and support for survivors with sequelae. Many points covered by the roadmap should be of relevance to this latter group of pathogens. The members of the Taskforce also recognized that the objective of the roadmap should be aspirational but the goals should be realistically achievable. The challenge would be to strike the right balance.

The background document presented current knowledge on the epidemiology of bacterial meningitis, including global and regional mortality and incidence, modelling the burden of disease, and sequelae in terms of risk and their impact (disability-adjusted life years).Discussion highlighted the unreliability of global and regional data on deaths from meningitis, and the wide discrepancies between estimates of mortality and morbidity. Concerns were expressed about using existing estimates as the basis for formulating targets.Several questions and proposals emerged. One suggestion was to find out whether the institution credited with gathering the most reliable data on childhood pneumonia and H. influenzae type b meningitis (the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, USA) could restart its work on estimating meningococcal cases and deaths. Another suggestion was to convene a meeting of modellers and epidemiologists with the aim of reconciling data, sources and estimates, as WHO had done previously for developing roadmaps on malaria and other diseases. Yet another was to generate separate estimates of meningitis and sepsis in neonates to define more clearly what was recognized as a high burden of mortality and disease. The situation analysis could contain information on less common causes of meningitis even if there were few data. Comparative data on the burden of other diseases would be valuable for advocacy and designing preventive interventions. Data on sequelae in survivors are particularly scarce, even though in Africa about one third of cases of meningitis appeared to result in sequelae and the disease is one of the main causes of deafness; a suggested starting point was a desk review of literature.

The background document focused on laboratory tests and surveillance. It identified strengths and weaknesses, and defined the following priorities:1 development of rapid diagnostic tests,10 in particular: (1) for surveillance purposes (in epidemic settings) to identify organisms rapidly at peripheral level (outbreak control); (2) for global (epidemic and non-epidemic) settings (to identify bacterial infection for individual case management); and (3) globally (for detection of several pathogens with a multiplex test at hospital level);
2. strengthening of countries’ capacity for rapid diagnostic confirmation, including: better lumbar puncture policies and practice; and improved transport networks for samples;3. collecting and using country surveillance data – laboratory and epidemiological data linked at country level, regional data management tools linked to country databases, country data from all regions reported to WHO;4. international collaboration on molecular surveillance – a global genome library and metagenomics, with greater country access to reference centres.In discussion, it was noted that the initial purpose behind the development of rapid diagnostic tests in the African meningitis belt was to identify pathogens responsible for outbreaks. As treatment with ceftriaxone for five days seems to be acceptable, affordable and successful, there is less need clinically for identification of the pathogen during epidemics, for example differentiation between infections caused by meningococci and pneumococci. However, serogroup-specific information is still needed to inform vaccine response, and rapid diagnostic tests do allow early detection of cases and, with multiplex formats, a wide range of pathogens. If available as point-of-care tests, they could reduce or overcome the difficulties experienced with transport of samples to often-remote reference centres and shorten the time needed to receive a response. It was argued that their use could be crucial, leading to earlier initiation of treatment and better outcomes. Not all countries have well-developed or functioning surveillance systems, and rapid diagnostic tests could have a valuable role in supporting epidemiological surveillance in such countries. Strengthening rapid confirmation within a country (as with the Ebola virus disease outbreak in Sierra Leone) is a major challenge. Further, several pharmaceutical companies are developing and selling diagnostic tests for Ebola virus – about 70 million in 2017: a substantial market – and the rationale for the companies’ activities could usefully be explored.In most resource-constrained countries, surveillance of vaccine-preventable diseases is externally funded and therefore sustainability is a major concern. However, examples of good practice exist; for instance, in Uganda, such surveillance is part of an integrated disease control programme. Problems can arise, however, with the maintenance of equipment. Other issues raised included the sensitivity of the tests, availability of standard operating procedures, training, and bioinformatics support to interpret sequence-based information (it was mentioned that the Wellcome Trust supports courses on bioinformatics and building this capacity in developing countries). It was recommended that the Taskforce could disseminate case studies of successes and best practices. It was also suggested that market research could be done into needs at different levels. Big questions remain about what priority should be given to rapid diagnostic tests, who should push the R&D agenda, and finally who pays for their supply to low- and lower-middle-income countries?Clear guidance on surveillance for group B streptococcal infections is lacking and data on the burden of disease due to such infections are scarce. Collection of data through a set of sentinel sites was proposed as an option for gathering better data.

The background document focused on antibiotic treatment regimens, prevention and management of sequelae, chemoprophylaxis of meningococcal disease (both of contacts and the community), and screening and prophylaxis for group B streptococci.Participants agreed that the recommendation for the five-day duration of ceftriaxone treatment (seven days under two months of age) was rational and sound. The treatment is effective for all the pathogens being considered and sterilizes cerebrospinal fluid. In cases where facilities were overwhelmed, return to a single dose with monitoring of clinical progress could still be adopted in outbreaks confirmed to be due to N. meningitidis.Concern was expressed about the lack of follow-up after infection and treatment, given that deafness and other sequelae may not be apparent immediately. Further research was needed to understand whether the risks of sequelae were the same for each causal agent, and to what extent the risk decreased when treatment was begun promptly after infection. The role of adjunctive therapies (that is, steroids such as dexamethasone) in the prevention of sequelae was discussed and its potential role would need further consideration during development of the roadmap.Efficacy of prophylaxis at the household level has been shown in developed country settings, and a recent clinical trial of ciprofloxacin prophylaxis to the whole village during an epidemic in the meningitis belt showed a reduced attack rate in those communities. Further work is needed before this practice is recommended widely. For instance, the lack of data from urban contexts needs to be rectified and potential for enhancement of antimicrobial resistance requires careful consideration.For group B streptococcal infections, it was argued that there was a potentially huge market for a simple rapid point-of-care diagnostic test, and that it was important that the roadmap encourage R&D on such a test.Members of the Taskforce emphasized that the roadmap must include the need for all diagnostics, vaccines and treatments to be quality assured.

The background document describes multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines that are currently licensed and in clinical development; licensed meningococcal B protein vaccines; H. influenzae type b vaccines; multivalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccines that are currently licensed and in the late stages of development; and group B streptococcal vaccines in development., Currently, there are three licensed quadrivalent conjugate meningococcal vaccines (A, C, W and Y), of which are all prequalified by WHO. For low-income and lower-middle-income countries, however, their high cost of these conjugate vaccines, which confer longer-lasting immunity and herd protection, renders them unaffordable. In addition, their availability is limited. Despite efforts to make a smooth transition from polysaccharide to conjugate vaccines, most manufacturers have either downsized or stopped production of polysaccharide vaccines, with two phasing out production of affordable polysaccharide vaccines. Manufacturers were encouraged to submit vaccines for WHO prequalification. Vaccines directed at preventing epidemic meningitis in Africa have historically represented a relatively small, less predictable and profitable market for multinational pharmaceutical companies, although the sizeable number of people making the hajj and umrah pilgrimages to Saudi Arabia each year (more than two million for the hajj alone) demonstrates a certain steady demand for such vaccines. As for all vaccines, good data are needed for determining supply and demand and for price negotiations, including meningococcal vaccines used for routine prevention, but also for outbreak response.The increasing uptake of meningococcal vaccines globally is seen as a success. However, the fact that it has taken 30 years for vaccines such as that against H. influenzae type b to be widely introduced provides context to the long process. Nevertheless, the Taskforce considered that, for newer vaccines that are designed to be more affordable, uptake should and would be more rapid. More information on policies (for vaccination and complementary public health measures) and coverage for each vaccine should be provided in the baseline situation analysis.For pneumococcal vaccines, clinical trials with protein-based vaccines have focused on nasopharyngeal carriage and otitis media and not the more clinically relevant but difficult to measure endpoints of invasive pneumococcal disease and pneumonia. On the other hand, multivalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccines have documented effectiveness against invasive pneumococcal disease and pneumonia and have been widely introduced globally. Of WHO’s 194 Member States, 53 are yet to introduce multivalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccines. Although the currently high price of these vaccines may be reduced in the future with competition from developing country vaccine manufacturers, there will still be financial difficulties for countries graduating from support from Gavi for their pneumococcal conjugate vaccination programmes. Prices are quoted for vaccines supplied for routine immunization programmes (EPI), and vaccines are not available at that negotiated price for other circumstances, for example, for use in children over one year of age or for outbreak response. African countries were encouraged to explore pooled negotiations and to work together on regulatory aspects (especially as there are instances of fake or substandard vaccines being used).

The Secretariat acknowledged that the background document would benefit from additional information, including a section on access, and that the roadmap would clearly deal with that issue. It should include liaising with initiatives such as ones pertaining to lower- and middle-income countries, prices and procurement, with WHO contributing advocacy on these matters.The challenges facing the development of group B streptococcal vaccines were acknowledged, but it was noted that the US Food and Drug Administration will soon evaluate the first vaccine specifically developed for use in pregnant women to protect their infants. That could set a useful precedent, even though there is extensive experience with tetanus toxoid and increasing use of influenza vaccine in pregnancy. Following WHO’s recommendation that H. influenzae type b conjugate vaccines should be included in all routine infant immunization programmes, their introduction in all but three (China, Russian Federation and Thailand) of WHO’s Member States is rightly seen as a success. Each of the three countries chose not to use the vaccine for different reasons. Because of China’s large population the proportion of the world’s birth cohort not vaccinated stands at around 20% (and a sizeable proportion may not be vaccinated in India). Nevertheless, the global situation raises the possibility of eliminating H. influenzae type b, although vaccination coverage rates need to be raised and many countries do not administer a booster dose. With the decline in H. influenzae type b infections, a rise in cases due to type a has been seen; that situation needs monitoring. The incidence of type a disease increased in the USA six-fold between 2002 and 2016, with particularly high rates in American Indian and Alaskan Native populations as well as in Canada in indigenous people. The disease appears to be as severe as that due to type b.

The background document analysed the various functions of information and support across the spectrum of care. It examined aspects of advocacy for vaccines and presented several successful approaches. As it is estimated that at least 14 million survivors of meningitis are disabled or impaired, any global plan would need to consider the impact of their condition on their family members and society as a core feature.Approaches to implementation generally depend on levels of economic development and are not systematically measured. The roadmap needs to recognize the crucial role of the community in its successful implementation, especially given the strategies for social mobilization that have increased vaccination rates in some populations. The impact of any plan will only be seen after several years, but quality of life can be improved through information, support, advice and counselling for entire populations, with information and awareness starting before infection and support starting with diagnosis.Members of the Taskforce deplored the paucity of support in many low-income countries for the disabled, including those disabled as a result of meningitis (for instance, little provision of wheelchairs and hardly any services for deafness). There were, however, rare encouraging signs, for example, a civil society organization in Burkina Faso running schools for children with deafness after meningitis. The key, it was felt, lay in a combination of government commitment and engagement of civil society, with the need for advocacy aimed at politicians and at communities to raise awareness and demand. Care of those with sequelae should be part of the design of any programme and involve multiple ministries, including those responsible for health and education. Meanwhile, community awareness must be raised; the health sector should review programmes on deafness and there could be studies of whether introduction of conjugate vaccines reduces the prevalence of deafness; the relative risks of deafness and sequelae from different forms of meningitis should be defined; and networks of meningitis associations and family members should be encouraged and established. Confidence in vaccines needs to be built, maintained and indeed strengthened. The Secretariat could collate information on relevant services in health facilities, and, following its experience with the roadmap on neglected tropical diseases, it could assemble a toolkit with training packages and examples of communication best practices. Health surveys on the prevalence of disabilities could provide useful information.

The members of the Taskforce agreed that, as things stood at the moment, the roadmap could be structured around five pillars: prevention and epidemic control; diagnosis and treatment; disease surveillance; advocacy and information; support and aftercare for survivors. Access and monitoring would be cross-cutting issues (Figure 1).

The Taskforce reviewed the terms of reference of the Technical Task Force and the Roadmap Support Group. The revised versions of the terms of reference are attached as Annexes 4 and 5 for further consideration.

The consensus of the meeting was that the roadmap should consist of the following elements. The strategic and specific goals should be considered as tentative and would be further discussed and refined as the roadmap was developed, in particular the target percentages .TitleDefeating meningitis by 2030: a roadmap.

ScopeThe focus of the roadmap will be on meningitis caused by organisms responsible globally for most cases of bacterial meningitis: Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Streptococcus agalactiae.Meningitis caused by other bacteria or other organisms will be included in strategic goals where applicable.VisionA world free from meningitisStrategic goals by 2030

Eliminate meningitis epidemics, Reduce cases and deaths from vaccine-preventable meningitis by 80%, Provide high quality care for survivors with sequelae


Prevention and epidemic control
Universal introduction, achievement and maintenance of 90% coverage of existing pneumococcal and H. influenzae type b conjugate vaccines.Ensured availability and affordability and broader serotype coverage of pneumococcal vaccine.Access to affordable meningococcal multivalent conjugate and N. meningitidis serogroup B vaccines in all areas where needed.Adapted vaccination strategies to reach the maximum benefit in terms of protection as soon as possible.Licensure, WHO pre-qualification and introduction of an affordable group B streptococcal vaccine.Implementation, when feasible, of prophylaxis against group B streptococcal infection in pregnant women in all settings (before vaccine introduction).Optimization of strategies for outbreak prevention and response including vaccination and chemoprophylaxis.


Diagnosis and treatment.Widely accessible, quality-assured point-of-care tests developed to identify main meningitis pathogens.Patients promptly receive appropriate treatment and supportive care. 
Disease surveillance.Strengthened national surveillance of meningitis pathogens with reporting and use of evidence to guide national and global policies.Increased quality-assured laboratory diagnostic confirmation capacity with strengthened use of existing tools and microbiological tests.with increased coverage with lumbar puncture.Advance sequence-based global surveillance for meningitis pathogens.Support and aftercare for survivors.Existing disability support services relevant to meningitis sequelae mapped.Best practice for after care and support identified.
Ensured access for meningitis survivors with sequelae to appropriate support services and education (cross-reference to World Health Assembly resolutions would be desirable) .Engagement of civil society encouraged. Consideration of sequelae included in treatment guidelines and national plans.


Advocacy and informationImproved recognition of meningitis as a health priority, globally and nationally.Awareness among all populations of meningitis signs, symptoms and sequelae and appropriate healthcare-seeking behaviour ensured.The right to meningitis prevention and services valued and demanded by communities.Vaccine confidence maintained.Partnerships encouraged between civil society (including nongovernmental organizations) and governments to meet these aims.

Research prioritiesDisease burdenObtain accurate data on the global burden of meningitisShare assumptions, understand and possibly resolve differences in different disease burden estimatesBetter understanding of, and approaches to prevention of, pneumococcal outbreaks.Obtain accurate data on burden of sequelae and impact on society.Diagnosis and treatment.Market research for rapid diagnostic tests: what are the incentives and barriers for manufacturers?R&D for point-of-care diagnostics (including sequencing methods, and blood-based rapid diagnostic tests without the need for lumbar puncture).Do adjunctive therapies reduce sequelae?What is the risk/benefit balance of implement screening and prophylaxis of group B streptococci in low-resource settings?Disease surveillance.Understand the full aetiology of meningitis (including negative cerebrospinal fluid samples)?Prevention and epidemic controlOptimum schedule for N. meningitidis pentavalent vaccine?Optimum schedule for pneumococcal vaccine for herd-protection?Optimum schedule for H. influenzae type b vaccination (for elimination?)?Clinical development of new vaccines, in particular against group B streptococcal infections.Refinement of evidence for prophylaxis during meningitis outbreaks in the African meningitis belt?
Advocacy and information and Support and aftercare for survivors.Population awareness of signs and symptoms of meningitis. (Inter)relationship between awareness of signs and symptoms of meningitis and suitable health-seeking behaviours. Barriers to health-seeking behaviours. Follow-up practice after discharge by health provider following treatment for meningitis. Disability-service signposting in primary, secondary and tertiary settings for survivors of meningitis. Availability of disability services mapped to meningitis sequelae

Revise and finalize baseline situation analysis and its constituent documentsReview and define priority research areas. Elaborate a communication plan for the work of the Taskforce and the development of the roadmap. Start work on a business case. Continue to map stakeholders and attributing their roles and responsibilities. Prepare for an extended Technical Taskforce meeting in the first quarter of 2019 and a “defeating meningitis by 2030” roadmap consultation (large stakeholders’ consultation) in the second quarter of 2019, to be followed by a web-based public consultation. Ensure political engagement within WHO. Plan to submit roadmap for consideration by WHO’s regional committees in their sessions in the third quarter of 2019. Plan to submit the revised text to the Seventy-second World Health Assembly in May 2020 through the Executive Board in January 2020. Prepare for a consultation by the Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on immunization in 2020: define terms of reference and establish a SAGE working group on meningococcal vaccines and vaccination in 2019.

As mentioned above, a next step will be to map stakeholders. It was proposed that, as a starting point, a list of experts with the following areas of expertise could be drawn up: epidemiology and surveillance. Also, immunization policy, diagnosis and treatment of meningitis,  meningococcal, pneumococcal, Haemophilus influenzae type b and group B, and streptococcal vaccines. In addition, statistics and mathematical modeling, health economics, social anthropology and heath emergencies, immunization programmes and service delivery, information and advocacy, disability.


Major progress has occurred over the past twenty years in the prevention of meningitis globally, in particular through the development, marketing and large public health use of extremely potent and life-savings vaccines. Meningitis remains a universal public health challenge, cases and outbreaks are highly dreaded in any country of the world. When cases occur they become immediately high-profile, raising political and media attention universally. Globally, there are still many deaths and long-term sequelae among survivors, particularly among vulnerable communities. An order of magnitude of the global number of deaths from meningitis was recently estimated to be over 300,000 deaths among the population under five years of age (the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation [IHME]: http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool; https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare; The Lancet 2016; 388: 1459–544). Meningitis and sepsis together were estimated to result in a mortality in children under five years of age similar to that from malaria, not accounting for devastating sequelae (IHME: Global, regional, and national causes of under-5 mortality in 2000–15: an updated systematic analysis with implications for the Sustainable Development Goals – The Lancet 2016; 388: 3027–35). The magnitude of the problem however varies dramatically globally. Developing countries suffer from the highest burden by far, while they remain faced with the biggest challenges in accessing to vaccines, diagnoses and care. Yet the current remarkable success observed toward the elimination of meningitis in many countries and notably that of epidemic meningitis A in Africa, in the century-old meningitis belt, is a fundamental source of optimism. The global public health community must not stop there to ensure that it reaches the next level and the steady sustainable state, in line with United Nations Sustainable Development Goals «To transform our world and leave no one behind » by 2030.The 2017 call: Wilton Park and OuagadougouOptimists are perseverant, and over 50 representatives from governments, global health organizations, public health bodies, academia, private sector and civil society expressed a unanimous wish for global perseverance at the May 2017 Wilton Park conference (Wilton Park: https://www.wiltonpark.org.uk/reports/page/2/). They called for a global vision and for the defeat of meningitis by 2030. Of note a high burden of meningitis is in Africa, several delegates from countries in the African meningitis belt were in attendance and contributed to the debates. WHO committed to answer the call acknowledging the global relevance, emphasizing the meningitis belt specificities, and outlining five preliminary strategic objectives: (1) ensuring long-term protection against meningococcal A for the entire at-risk population in the meningitis belt, building on the success of recent vaccination campaigns; (2) improving outbreak response and control of meningococcal epidemics in the meningitis belt, and management of patients and survivors; (3) enhancing disease surveillance in the meningitis belt, and promoting development point of case diagnostic tests; (4) promoting development and public health use of affordable vaccines that tackle different causes of meningococcal meningitis in the meningitis belt; and (5) calling for meningitis expertise to address globally the many different causes of meningitis around the world. Moreover at the September 2017 annual regional meeting on meningitis in Ouagadougou, another 200 representatives from 26 meningitis belt countries vibrantly called for perseverance, for meningitis as a global priority, for urgent actions in favour of a sustainable availability and an equitable access to vaccines.

This comes at an opportune time for WHO. A new Director General has been elected a few months ago. WHO is now in the process of finalizing its next Global Programme of Work (GPW) based on the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGs are consistent with WHO’s Constitution, which states: “The health of all peoples is fundamental to the attainment of peace and security and is dependent on the fullest cooperation of individuals and States”. WHO’s vision, rooted in Article 1 of its Constitution, is of: “A world in which all people attain the highest possible level of health and well-being.” In the context of the SDGs, WHO’s mission is three-fold i.e. to ‘Promote health, Keep the world safe, Serve the vulnerable’. It is structured around prioritizing universal health coverage (UHC) and health security (HS) associated with the mapping, building and sustaining capacities, and ensuring sustainable financing. Meningitis as a global priority captures the essence of this three-fold mission. An enhanced fight against meningitis is fully aligned with WHO’s mission and fits perfectly into its 13th General Programme of Work, with a focus on outcomes and impact; and opportunities for new fast track to elimination initiatives.

Meningitis is a largely vaccine-preventable disease, and could be for an even greater part with the advent of new vaccines. The case has long been made for linking UHC and immunization as potentially mutually reinforcing. Meningitis is an epidemic-prone disease, and as such deserves special attention given the potentially major impact on health systems, the economy and society as a whole. This is about health emergencies, this about health security, this is about serving the vulnerable, saving lives and preventing disabilities.Ongoing efforts and innovative approaches could be assembled into a coherent strategy focusing on impact and combining prevention, early detection and appropriate response, with a solid R&D component. Affordability would need to drive the agenda to ensure access and sustainability. Other areas such as enhancement of community engagement and management of cases and sequelae could also be considered. The near elimination of meningitis A in Africa provides a successful practical example for possible country-owned multi-partner initiatives.A global roadmap can set a vision, provide a high-level overview and communicate direction, outlining priority areas for research and activity, with goals and specific solutions to meet the desired milestones. While the roadmap would be global with a well-defined scope – e.g. bacterial meningitis and sepsis – strategic goals, milestones and research priority activities would likely need to be refined by world regions to ensure equitable and sustainable access to vaccines, diagnosis and treatment. Among key founding aspects: setting the baseline with the documentation of the global burden of meningitis to be further addressed by the roadmap; the baseline situation analysis (landscaping) of meningitis control tools available, the R&D pipeline and the gaps in terms of access to current tools or need to develop new tools; the links with other major initiatives (e.g. antimicrobial resistance, measles elimination). Impact comes with focus, perseverance and a ‘committed team’. A technical taskforce, made up of historical expert partners in the fight against meningitis, can be commissioned to drive and support the process.

Efficient collaboration and coordination will be key in the coming years to sustain and further pursue the outstanding meningitis achievements of the last decade, in order to meet the UN Sustainable Development Goals for 2030. An outline of the proposed process for roadmap development and implementation is featured in figure 1. The Technical Taskforce (TTF) is formed for the purpose of developing and implementing a global roadmap. Critical expert stakeholders would ensure support and advice through a Strategy Support Group (SSG). Policy and resolutions from WHO bodies at regional and global level would drive the global and specific agendas and ensure the country ownership and political will critical to a successful implementation.WHO secretariat will provide support and overall coordination, and ensure continuous oversight, with accountability to its Member States for the development and subsequent implementation of the roadmap. WHO specific responsibilities will also include the drafting of the baseline situation analysis and the convening of the TTF. WHO will act as Secretariat for the TTF and ensure appropriate liaison between the SSG and the TTF.

The Technical Task Force is a consortium of major technical partners historically invested in long-term meningitis control with complementary focus and expertise. The responsibility of the TTF is to develop the roadmap, including:

To develop the global meningitis roadmap, taking responsibility for the initial steps, as well as for the broad consultation and review cycles, including:To review and provide technical contributions to the Baseline Situation Analysis (BSA.To draft the vision, scope and objectives of the roadmap.Based on the BSA, to propose strategies, tools and activities required to achieve the roadmap objectives.To support WHO, in its role as secretariat, in convening the stakeholders consultations and coordinating the public consultations aiming to refine and agree on a global roadmap. andTo define the roadmap implementation and monitoring structure,


To contribute to the finalization and dissemination of technical documents to support their endorsement and the formulation of policy and resolutions by WHO bodies*, including:To engage with the Strategy Support Group on the roadmap process.To publish and disseminate the roadmap, in close collaboration with WHO. To act as ‘ambassadors’ of the roadmap, contributing to raising public awareness.


Meningitis is deadly and debilitating; it strikes quickly, has serious health, economic and social consequences, and affects people of all ages in all countries of the world. Bacterial meningitis can cause epidemics, lead to death within 24 hours, and leave one in five patients with lifelong disability after infection. Many cases of and deaths from meningitis are vaccine preventable, but progress in defeating meningitis lags behind that for other vaccine-preventable diseases.
In 2017, representatives from governments, global health organizations, public health bodies,academia, the private sector and civil society called for a global vision to defeat meningitis as a public health threat. WHO took up the call to action and, with global partners and experts involved in meningitis prevention and control, developed a road map to defeat meningitis by 2030. Wide public and expert consultations took place throughout 2019.
This first global road map on meningitis sets out a plan to tackle the main causes of acute bacterial meningitis (meningococcus, pneumococcus, Haemophilus influenzae and group B streptococcus). The three visionary goals are to: (i) eliminate epidemics of bacterial meningitis; (ii) reduce cases of and deaths from vaccine-preventable bacterial meningitis; (iii) reduce disability and improve quality of life after meningitis of any cause. In order to achieve these visionary goals, the road map identifies strategic goals, key activities and milestones across five pillars: prevention and epidemic control; diagnosis and treatment; disease surveillance; support and care for people affected by meningitis, and advocacy and engagement.For prevention and epidemic control, the main goals are to achieve higher vaccine coverage among the population, develop new vaccines, improve prevention strategies and ensure a more effective response to meningitis epidemics. The diagnosis and treatment goals are focused on rapid confirmation of acute bacterial meningitis and optimal care. Improved global surveillance, based on effective national surveillance systems, is needed to guide meningitis prevention and control measures, document the impact of vaccines and improve estimates of disease burden, including sequelae of meningitis. In the area of support and care for people affected by meningitis, the focus is on access to care for early diagnosis and treatment, improved management of after-effects and the provision of support, including rehabilitation. For advocacy and engagement, the aim is to ensure that the road map is prioritized and integrated into country plans, that there is high awareness ofmeningitis and its impact among the population and a commitment to equal access for meningitis prevention, treatment and support for all those affected by meningitis.
The meningitis road map has been designated as a flagship global strategy of the WHO’s Thirteenth General Programme of Work, 2019–2023 and is an essential component in achieving universal health coverage. The road map will reinforce and combine with wider initiatives, such as those aimed at strengthening primary health care and health systems, increasing immunization coverage, improving global health security, fighting antimicrobial resistance and advocating for the rights of persons with disabilities. It will complement other global control strategies, such as those addressing sepsis, pneumonia, tuberculosis and HIV.
Implementation will be a challenge for all countries across the world, but especially in resource-poor settings where the burden of meningitis is greatest. The targets for the visionary and strategic goals will be adapted to regional and local contexts. Plans for monitoring and evaluation, communication and risk management will be available to guide and support implementation. Global action to implement this road map and achieve the ambitious goals to defeat meningitis is needed now. Strong commitments from countries, partners and donors will be essential to success.

This road map is a call to action. It is a call to defeat meningitis by 2030.
Meningitis is a life-threatening disease caused by inflammation of the membranes that surround thebrain and spinal cord and is predominantly caused by infection with bacteria and viruses.1 Acute bacterial meningitis (1) is one of the deadliest and most disabling forms of this illness (2–5); it can cause epidemics, lead to death within 24 hours and leave one in five people with lifelong disability after infection.
Many cases of and deaths from meningitis are vaccine preventable, but progress in defeating meningitis lags behind other vaccine-preventable diseases (6). Despite significant progress in reducing the incidence of meningitis over the past 20 years, there were still an estimated 5 million new cases globally and 290 000 deaths from meningitis in 20172 (7). Although meningitis affects all ages, young children are most at risk with around half of cases and deaths occurring in children under 5 years of age. Meningitis and meningitis-related sepsis can result in severe after-effects, such as hearing loss, visual and physical impairment, cognitive disability and limb loss, which have a considerable emotional, social and financial impact on individuals, families and communities (8–10). In 2017, it was estimated that over 20 million years of healthy life (years of life lost due to premature mortality added to years lost due to disability) were lost from meningitis worldwide (5).
Although the burden of meningitis is greatest in the meningitis belt of sub-Saharan Africa, meningitis is a threat in all countries of the world (4,6,10) (Fig. 1). Since 2014, epidemics of bacterial meningitis have occurred in many countries including Kyrgyzstan, Fiji, Nigeria, Niger and Chile (11–13), and the spread of some virulent strains across the world has emphasized the need for a global approach to surveillance and prevention. Recommended vaccination programmes against some of the bacteriathat cause meningitis have not yet been introduced in many countries, leaving their citizens at risk (5,14). Wherever it occurs, meningitis presents a major challenge for health systems, the economy and society.

In May 2017, over 50 representatives from governments, global health organizations, public health bodies, academia, the private sector and civil society called for a global vision action to “defeat meningitis by 2030” (15). In September of that year, 200 representatives from the 26 countries of theAfrican meningitis belt amplified this call and highlighted the need for equitable and sustainable access to meningitis vaccines (16).The WHO is coordinating this call to action. A Technical Task Force of major partners historically invested in long-term meningitis control, with complementary focus and expertise, was convened to develop the road map presented here. A baseline situation analysis (5) was undertaken in 2018, and experts in meningitis, health and disability met early in 2019 to advance the draft road map (17), followed by wider expert and public consultations throughout 2019. Patient groups around the world were extensively consulted about the global road map (18). In responses from over 600 groups in more than 90 countries, prevention was given the highest priority. The three most popular topics for inclusion in the road map were making vaccines more widely available, improved awareness and improved diagnosis (immediate, rapid). The meningitis road map has been designated as one of the four flagship global strategies of theThirteenth General Programme of Work, 2019–2023 to prevent high-threat infectious hazards. This strategy captures the essence of WHO’s mission to drive progress towards the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, especially Goal 3 concerning health, which is structured around ensuring universal health coverage to protect the most vulnerable, and global health security topromote health and keep the world safe.

The road map on defeating meningitis sets out a plan to tackle the main causes of acute bacterial meningitis: Neisseria meningitidis ((Nm), meningococcus), Streptococcus pneumoniae ((Spn), pneumococcus), Haemophilus influenzae (Hi) and Streptococcus agalactiae (group B Streptococcus ( GBS)).4 This focus is based on: (i) evidence of the worldwide burden of disease due to these four organisms, which also cause sepsis and pneumonia and were responsible for over 50% of the 290 000 deaths from all-cause meningitis in 2017 (7); (ii) the impact that this global strategy could have on diminishing the burden by 2030, since effective vaccines that protect against disease caused by all four organisms are currently available (or in development). Although the focus of this road map is not on other important causes of meningitis, such as tuberculosis, Cryptococcus, enteric bacteria and viruses such as enterovirus, several goals aimed at reducing the burden of disease are applicable to all causes of meningitis.

Our collective vision is “Towards a world free of meningitis”. Because meningitis has so many causes, it cannot be eliminated or eradicated. There will be no “world free” moment for meningitis, but we are committed to get as close as possible. This plan, therefore, aims to defeat meningitis as a public health threat, reducing the number of cases substantially and keeping them down. All United Nations Member States are committed to achieving universal health coverage by 2030 (20). The visionary goals of eliminating epidemics, reducing the number of cases and deaths, and giving priority to caring for those with disability are fully aligned with universal health coverage and have equity as a guiding principle. An epidemic is defined for this goal as a cumulative attack rate of >100 suspected meningitis cases/100 000 population within one year in a given population based on a definition used for the African meningitis belt (21). Each region will set its own definitions for epidemics/outbreaks and targets for reduction according to local epidemiology. ** Global and regional targets to be agreed and applied to acute bacterial meningitis caused by Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS. By complementing global control strategies for diseases such as sepsis and pneumonia that can be caused by the same organisms that cause meningitis, the road map will bring benefits that extend beyond meningitis. The roadmap will reinforce and complement wider initiatives relating to universal health coverage, primary health care, health systems strengthening, immunization, global health security, antimicrobial resistance, and the rights, support, rehabilitation and inclusion of people with disabilities (see the section entitled Connection to other global initiatives), and will also help to achieve existing country priorities. Activities under the road map will form an integral part of primary health care aligned with national strategies to achieve universal health coverage and other initiatives at all levels. The successful implementation of the road map will depend, first and foremost, on regional and country engagement and political willingness to defeat meningitis. These efforts will require aligned and effective partner support, including from the private sector and civil society, to bring together all globally available resources (technical, human and financial) as well as the support of the WHO Secretariat. A business case will be used to mobilize sufficient resources for WHO and its partners to support Member States in delivering on the strategic objectives, together with a Public Health Value Proposition for one or more priority milestones. Global research priorities, which are needed to achieve the goals, will be identified separately in the implementation plan. A Strategy Support Group of global-level partners and sponsors, committed to the mission of defeating meningitis, is expected to promote the road map through high-level advocacy, raising public awareness and supporting implementation activities. The WHO Secretariat, made up of staff from the Department of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals, the Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse, the Department for Management of Noncommunicable Diseases, Disability, Violence and Injury Prevention and the WHO Health Emergencies Programme, at country, regional and global levels, will provide integrated support, coordination and oversight, and will be accountable to Member States for the development and implementation of the road map. Country planning will take into consideration regional specificities and will be adapted to country settings under different activity streams, including research, strategy and policy and country implementation. Targets for visionary and strategic goals will be prioritized and adapted according to the regional and local context, with priority countries identified within each region, taking into consideration factors such as the meningitis burden and equity of access to prevention and care. Plans for monitoring and evaluation, communication and risk management will be available to guide and support implementation. To ensure that regional needs and specificities are met and that regional commitment is promoted, regions will develop specific implementation frameworks, including key regional indicators, to be endorsed by the regional technical and advisory bodies. Enhanced efforts are needed to encourage all recommended immunization, especially in low-and middle-income countries where the burden of meningitis is greatest, and to promote high levels of vaccine coverage at the national and subnational levels. Conjugate vaccines are dramatically reducing the global burden of disease caused by Nm, Spn and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) but their global uptake and impact needs to be enhanced (5). However, not all serogroups/types are currently covered by these vaccines. Novel protein-based vaccines against Nm serogroup B (MenB) disease are now being used at the public health level in some high-income countries (5). No vaccine yet exists for the prevention of GBS disease, but GBS conjugate vaccine candidates are in development. Several Nm and Spn conjugate vaccine candidates are also in late-stage development, including multivalent products with broader serogroup/type coverage than existing vaccines. In addition, protein vaccine candidates against Nm, Spn and GBS are in various stages of development. Furthermore, as the high usage of antibiotics in the treatment of suspected meningitis can lead to the development of antimicrobial resistance, enhanced and sustained vaccination programmes being developed under the Immunization Agenda 2030 will have an increasingly important role in strategies for mitigating the negative impact of antimicrobial resistance. National plans should include vaccines as a key strategic priority or as a first line of defense against antimicrobial resistance in organisms that cause meningitis. Chemoprophylaxis is generally used for close contacts of cases of meningococcal meningitis, but needs further evaluation, particularly in the context of epidemics in the African meningitis belt. Policies for preventing the mother-to-child transmission of GBS, using intravenous antibiotics, are currently being implemented using screening or risk-based strategies in many high-income countries. Evaluation of factors such as the GBS disease burden, epidemiology and transmission, health service infrastructure, health care access and antibiotic supplies is needed before implementing prevention strategies in lowand middle-income countries. Although improvements in laboratory capacity have been seen through Invasive Bacterial Diseases Surveillance Networks, the most important challenges in the control of Nm or Spn meningitis epidemics include weak laboratory capacity to rapidly confirm the epidemic pathogen (see Pillar 2) and lack of timely access to sufficient quantities of affordable vaccines for epidemic response. For Spn meningitis epidemics, guidance on response is needed. Ultimately, evidence-based policy adjustment followed by high uptake of adequate preventive vaccination strategies, using appropriate vaccines, would ideally prevent infections and epidemics. The aims of this pillar are to: (i) achieve and maintain high coverage of licensed/WHO prequalified vaccines against Nm, Spn and Hib with equal access in all countries, and introduce these vaccines in countries that have not yet introduced them in line with WHO recommendations; (ii) introduce effective and affordable new WHO prequalified vaccines targeting Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS; (iii) develop evidence-based policy on Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS vaccination strategies that result in optimal individual protection and, where possible, herd protection; (iv) develop and implement context-specific strategies to prevent GBS infection in infants; (v) develop and improve strategies for epidemic prevention and response including vaccination, chemoprophylaxis, infection control and risk communication, inclusive of mass gatherings and humanitarian emergencies. 

Implement locally appropriate tailored immunization strategies to achieve and maintain high vaccination coverage against Nm, Spn, Hib in all countries, reinforcing and complementing existing immunization strategies, including those targeting special risk groups Ensure proper linkages and synergies with WHO, UNICEF, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance and other global or regional initiatives aiming to reduce price and increase sustainable access to vaccines for low- and middle-income countries Nm (meningitis belt). By 2021, vaccination against Nm serogroup A in routine immunization programmes in >= 18/26 meningitis belt countries; by 2023, in all meningitis belt countries as per national priorities Spn, Hib.

By 2022, Hib conjugate vaccines and, by 2025, Spn conjugate vaccines, included in routine infant immunization programmes in all countries.

By 2030, vaccine coverage of the full immunization schedule maintained or achieved in all countries (target coverage as defined by the Immunization Agenda 2030 and regional prioritization). Support development, licensure, WHO prequalification and introduction of effective, affordable and safe new vaccines: additional multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines; additional MenB, pneumococcal and Hi vaccines; new GBS vaccines Nm. By 2020, WHO target product profile for multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine published, including thermostability considerations. By 2021, WHO Technical Report Series for multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine published. By 2022, at least one affordable multivalent (ACWXY) meningococcal conjugate vaccine licensed and WHO prequalified. By 2023, introduction of vaccination against Nm serogroups ACWY/ACWXY in routine immunization programmes started in >=5 meningitis belt countries and, by 2030, vaccination against Nm serogroups ACWY/ACWXY implemented in all meningitis belt countries as per national priorities, with target coverage as defined by the Immunization Agenda 2030 and regional prioritization. By 2026, at least one affordable Nm serogroup B vaccine and sufficient sources of affordable multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines to ensure security of supply. By 2026, locally relevant meningococcal disease vaccination programmes, including Nm multivalent conjugate vaccines and/or Nm serogroup B vaccines as relevant, introduced in alignment with epidemiological evidence and according to regional policy in >=10 countries Spn. By 2021, WHO Technical Report Series for pneumococcal conjugate vaccines updated. By 2021, at least one, and by 2025 at least three, additional affordable licensed and WHO prequalified pneumococcal conjugate vaccines, with coverage consistent with emerging data on serotypes causing invasive disease in low- and middle-income countries. By 2026, at least one new Spn vaccine with broader coverage – either higher valency pneumococcal conjugate vaccine or protein containing vaccine – licensed and WHO prequalified GBS. By 2022, regulatory pathways for licensure of GBS vaccines defined, based on consultations with national regulatory authorities and the WHO Prequalification Team. By 2026, at least one affordable vaccine against GBS licensed and WHO prequalified for maternal immunization during pregnancy Improve support to vaccine manufacturers in their efforts to ensure diversification of sufficient quality-assured vaccine production capacity in more countries, including low- and middle-income countries. By 2030, GBS vaccine introduced, if licensed/ WHO prequalified, with Gavi support where needed, in >=10 countries in line with WHO policy Haemophilus influenzae type a (Hia). By 2028, at least one vaccine against Hia licensed to address high burden of disease in some communities, for example, indigenous peoples in North America and Australia. By 2030, sufficient sources of affordable and high quality Spn and Nm multivalent conjugate vaccines to ensure security of supply. By 2030, sufficient quality-assured vaccine production capacity diversified into >=5 lowand middle-income countries for Hib, Spn and Nm multivalent conjugate vaccines Evaluate vaccination strategies for use of multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines to achieve herd protection. By 2022, modelling of research studies on multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccination strategy completed and results disseminated with open access to support vaccine introduction strategies. By 2024, cluster randomized and/or other carriage studies on multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccine to inform vaccination strategy completed and published Develop global policy for use of MenB and multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines, update or develop policies on Spn, Hi and GBS vaccines, and support national policy-making as relevant Enable and promote the sharing of knowledge between countries (for example, on accurate cost-effectiveness models) to support national policy decisions, particularly in low-incidence settings. By 2022, global policy available for use of MenB and multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines. By 2030, global policies on Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS vaccines updated or developed as new vaccines and evidence become available Assess the overall vaccine impact, duration of protection, serotype replacement and indirect effects induced with different pneumococcal conjugate vaccine schedules to inform vaccination strategies for use of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in order to maintain immunity in populations and to prevent/control vaccine-preventable pneumococcal disease among at-risk individuals. By 2025, vaccine effects and duration of protection induced with different pneumococcal conjugate vaccine schedules documented, including feasibility of new dosing schedules, catch-up campaigns, and immunization programmes in older age groups to prevent serotype 1 epidemics. By 2026, global policy on pneumococcal conjugate vaccine schedules updated and implemented based on these findings Establish immune correlates of protection (serogroup /type specific) for Nm, Spn, and GBS. By 2025, studies to establish further immune thresholds or correlates of protection in different transmission settings conducted and published for Nm, Spn and GBS Quantify the potential benefits of Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS vaccines on decreasing overall antibiotic use for invasive infections or prophylaxis and on reducing antimicrobial resistance. By 2024, potential benefits of Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS meningitis vaccines quantified on decreasing overall antibiotic use and reducing antimicrobial resistance Conduct research to further document transmission patterns of GBS and risk factors for early/late onset GBS disease. By 2023, study completed on transmission of GBS and risk factors for early/late onset GBS disease Develop and implement global policies on preventing GBS transmission to infants, taking into account evidence, burden and feasibility, with consideration for potential impact on AMR, linking with other sepsis, maternal and child health initiatives. By 2021, policy on microbiological screening-based or risk-based strategies against early onset GBS disease available for countries/regions according to disease burden and feasibility of implementation. By 2025, global guidelines on GBS prevention reviewed and updated. By 2028, recommended prevention policies implemented in medium/high-burden countries as set out defined in the GBS guidelines, unless superseded by a vaccination programme Review and establish WHO definitions for epidemics of meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis, (and clusters of late onset GBS disease) in all regions to guide investigation and control measures, including careful consideration of relevant spatial units (for example, districts, subdistricts) Develop, update and implement strategies on surveillance, preparedness and response to meningitis epidemics with attention to spatial units, including consideration of mass gathering issues, and enhancement of infection prevention and control programmes Update strategies on vaccination during and after humanitarian emergencies for preventing epidemics among refugees and displaced persons Consider multi-antigen campaigns as part of the above strategies, particularly for areas where population access to vaccination services is limited (for example, conflict zones), or for populations that are less likely to be included in vaccination campaigns (for example, people with disabilities). By 2021, WHO definitions updated or established for meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis epidemics (and late onset GBS disease clusters) in all regions. By 2023, strategies on surveillance, preparedness and response to meningitis epidemics updated, including updating reactive vaccination strategies and infection prevention and control programs. By 2025, policies guidelines implemented in >80% of countries (including all targeted countries) Develop strategies to ensure sufficient vaccine stockpile at the appropriate level (global, regional, national or subnational), and gradually transition from polysaccharide to affordable multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines to respond to epidemics. By 2022, International Coordinating Group (ICG) on Vaccine Provision stockpile of meningococcal vaccines appropriately replenished (quantity, composition, timeliness), building on predictive modelling research, to enable an early response to epidemics in the meningitis belt, as well as globally. By 2025, sufficient affordable multivalent meningococcal conjugate vaccines available globally to respond to epidemics in all regions without ICG intervention Define strategies to prevent/respond to pneumococcal meningitis epidemics. By 2021, WHO strategy for pneumococcal meningitis epidemic prevention and response published and implemented Conduct research and review policy for use of antibiotic prophylaxis as a control measure during meningococcal meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt, with consideration of potential impact on antimicrobial resistance. By 2021, additional study completed on the potential risks and benefits of this strategy of using antibiotic prophylaxis during meningococcal meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt. By 2022, revised policy (if necessary) on antibiotic prophylaxis during meningococcal meningitis epidemics in the African meningitis belt published, with possible time limit considerations (with due regard to and coordination with the introduction/ availability of multivalent Nm conjugate vaccines) Building on the evidence and broader programming context, develop global messages, resources and tools for advocacy, community engagement, social change, and crisis communication to promote and sustain meningitis vaccine uptake. Collate implementation and digital data for real time updates and guidance for strategic and operational recommendations. By 2021, social and communication channels mapping completed in all targeted countries. By 2021, policies for monitoring secondary communication of messages and community rumours on meningitis epidemics available and used globally. By 2021, risk communications with mixed methods of messaging available and used in meningitis epidemics globally Laboratory confirmation is well defined for the main bacterial pathogens, with culture and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) being the gold standards. However, health workers may not be trained or have laboratory support to identify cases of meningitis. Cerebrospinal fluid samples are often not collected and laboratory capacity in low- and middle-income countries is often limited. There is a need for novel, rapid high-performance diagnostic assays that are affordable, deliver accurate and quick results to diagnose bacterial meningitis based on use, impact, target population and skill level, and can ideally measure antibiotic sensitivity. This is important because antibiotics may be given in the informal sector before patients present for medical care, or by health care staff before samples are taken, and there is a need for tests that can identify the causative organism after antibiotics have been given. Although antibiotic treatment regimens are well established, WHO guidelines for the treatment of adults with bacterial meningitis are not currently available and, in many settings, the recommended antibiotics are not always available. A review of the role of adjunctive therapies in lowand middle-income countries is needed. The aims of this pillar are to: (i) improve diagnosis of meningitis at all levels of care; (ii) develop and facilitate access to diagnostic assays at all levels of care to increase confirmation of meningitis; (iii) develop and implement a context-specific strategy to identify mothers who are GBS carriers and for diagnosis, treatment and care of infant GBS, particularly for low-resource settings; (iv) provide and implement appropriate, context-specific, quality-assured guidance and tools for treatment and supportive care to reduce the risk of mortality, sequelae and antimicrobial resistance. Develop and disseminate regionally specific policies on testing requirements and tools for each level of the health system, according to the required decisionmaking (for example, for immediate clinical management, epidemic response, antimicrobial resistance). By 2022, regionally specific polices developed on testing requirements and tools for each level of the health system, according to the diagnostic purpose or required decision-making Evaluate role of blood sampling and dried bloodspots on filter paper in diagnosing meningitis/sepsis in lowand middle-income countries, especially in the African meningitis belt. By 2022, studies published on performance of blood testing in the diagnosis of meningitis/sepsis in in low- and middle-income countries, especially in the African meningitis belt Evaluate reasons for the low frequency of lumbar punctures. By 2022, report completed on reasons for the low frequency of lumbar punctures and recommendations for improvement Increase timely collection and testing of diagnostic lumbar punctures, blood and other specimen samples by ensuring availability of sterile kits, supporting national policies that promote cerebrospinal fluid and blood sampling, including in infants, and by increasing acceptance of lumbar punctures among communities and health professionals. By 2024, cerebrospinal fluid (and blood samples where feasible) collected in all targeted countries from >50% of suspected meningitis cases, including infants Establish appropriate training and supervision of health workers at each level of care for timely identification, diagnosis, referral and treatment of meningitis in all age groups. By 2026, a training programme on identification, diagnosis, referral and treatment of meningitis, including potential sequelae, established and integrated into existing training in >80% of countries (including all targeted countries) Establish innovative (pooled) funding mechanisms to facilitate the development and uptake of novel rapid diagnostic assays. By 2022, funding mechanisms established to facilitate the development of rapid diagnostic assays and deployment into the field at scale Develop/ensure a mechanism is in place to enable validation, production and adoption of diagnostic assays tailored to the intended populations and need. By 2024 a mechanism is in place to enable validation, production and adoption of diagnostic assays tailored to the intended populations and need Develop diagnostic assays (cerebrospinal fluid, blood or urine) to support immediate medical decisionmaking at the point of care. By 2026, quality-assured, affordable and accessible rapid diagnostic assay developed to rapidly detect invasive bacterial versus viral infection to support immediate medical decision-making at the point of care Develop diagnostic assays that identify the main pathogens of suspected meningitis cases and enable global access to the assays developed. By 2026, quality-assured, affordable and accessible multiplex diagnostic test available to identify and distinguish the main pathogens responsible for meningitis Develop affordable diagnostic assays, suitable for low resource settings, for (i) maternal carriage of GBS (ii) infant GBS infection. By 2026, a quality-assured, affordable and accessible diagnostic assay available to identify (i) maternal GBS carriage (ii) infant GBS infection Develop and implement a context-specific strategy for diagnosis of maternal carriage and of infant GBS infection, particularly for low-resource settings. By 2026, strategies for diagnosis of maternal carriage of GBS and of infant GBS infection available for all countries. By 2030, recommended policy implemented in 80% of countries (including all targeted countries) Review the evidence on potential benefit of adjunctive therapies for bacterial meningitis for example, mannitol, steroids in low-and middle-income countries. By 2022, potential benefit of adjunctive therapies in low-and middleincome countries reviewed Develop and implement comprehensive, regionally adapted guidelines and recommended tools on patient treatment and care for all age groups and causes of bacterial meningitis (including invasive GBS disease in infants) from early diagnosis to early identification, treatment and care of sequelae, and addressing antimicrobial resistance and integration into existing guidelines. By 2024, evidence-based guidelines and recommended tools developed on treatment and care of bacterial meningitis (including invasive GBS disease in infants) tailored to all resource settings made available for all regions and, by 2026, implemented in 80% of countries (including all targeted countries) Ensure that recommended and quality-assured antimicrobials and medical supplies needed for supportive care are affordable and accessible at country level. By 2028, recommended, quality-assured antimicrobials and supplies for supportive care are affordable and accessible in >80% of countries (including all targeted countries) WHO vaccine-preventable disease surveillance standards cover three of the main bacterial pathogens (Nm, Spn, Hib). However, guidelines for national surveillance of meningitis pathogens are not uniformly implemented and most countries have no recommended guidelines for GBS surveillance. In many countries, weak surveillance systems hamper prompt outbreak detection and response and can only provide limited data to inform decisions about vaccine introduction. Building on the support of international laboratory networks and external quality assessment, laboratory capacity for diagnostic testing, including molecular characterization and antimicrobial resistance, needs to be strengthened for effective surveillance. Accurate data on the burden of meningitis is not available in many parts of the world. Disease data reporting at the international level and whole genome sequence repositories are needed to strengthen global surveillance. There is little data on the long-term impact of meningitis and limited guidance on, or conduct of, studies and surveys of sequelae, for example, to measure the prevalence of deafness. Improving surveillance is key to establishing baseline data and measuring progress towards the road map targets. The aims of this pillar are to: (i) ensure that effective systems for surveillance of meningitis and detection of the main meningitis pathogens are in place in each country; (ii) develop and implement global guidance for surveillance of invasive GBS disease, including for low-income settings; (iii) develop and conduct surveys and studies to establish the burden of sequelae. Review or develop surveillance strategy (aligned with WHO vaccine-preventable disease surveillance standards) for the main meningitis pathogens in each region for all age groups, including guidance in conflict settings and epidemics, to be revised as necessary (Strategic Goal 11 covers GBS surveillance). By 2021, surveillance strategy available in all regions for the main meningitis pathogens Adopt, integrate and implement minimum standards for surveillance of the main meningitis pathogens at country level in terms of epidemiology (including all age groups), laboratory capacity (including the use of up to date diagnostic and antimicrobial tests), and data management. By 2025, minimum standards for surveillance of main bacterial meningitis pathogens implemented in targeted countries and integrated into national surveillance. By 2030, implemented in >80% of countries (including all targeted countries) Perform global surveillance of emerging resistance patterns of main pathogens, linking with antimicrobial resistance networks and control strategies. By 2023, monitoring of the antimicrobial pattern of main meningitis pathogens (annual reports, alerts) is integrated into existing global surveillance Establish a global coordinated mechanism in all regions for molecular surveillance of bacterial meningitis pathogens allowing for timely strain identification and the sharing of information. By 2023, representative proportion (target set by region) of Nm, Spn, Hi and GBS meningitis strains molecularly characterized and data shared in a globally coordinated network Establish a global genome partnership for meningitis pathogens (Nm, Spn, Hi, GBS), encourage participation, including the sharing of sequence information and associated clinical and epidemiological data, with clear governance and policies for access and use of strains. By 2023, global genome partnership functional for each of the four pathogens. By 2025, establish governance and policies for the sharing of strains and associated data, access and use of strains Develop epidemiological and economic analyses on the burden of GBS, including long-term disability, and on the avertable burden through interventions, including potential vaccines. By 2021, publish value proposition for GBS based on worldwide data Conduct a situation analysis on surveillance of GBS invasive disease worldwide. By 2021, situation analysis completed on GBS disease surveillance worldwide Develop global and regional strategies and tools for surveillance of GBS disease, including standardized case definitions, ascertainment methodologies and definitions of high-, medium- and low-burden. By 2022, global and regional strategies for surveillance of GBS disease developed Establish surveillance systems for GBS according to global/regional strategies. By 2024, surveillance of GBS implemented in high-burden regions and, by 2028, in medium-/low-burden regions Develop and implement a global strategy and tools for studies and surveys to establish and monitor the burden of sequelae. By 2022, global strategy and tools for studies and surveys to measure burden of sequelae developed and, by 2026, implemented One in five people surviving an episode of bacterial meningitis may have enduring after-effects (8). Common sequelae include seizures, hearing and vision loss, cognitive impairment, neuromotor disability and memory and behavioural changes, as well as scarring and limb amputations after meningococcal sepsis. Many people will also experience a range of less serious after-effects that are not always immediately apparent, for example, emotional difficulties. Aftercare is expensive and may not be affordable for families. Policies and services for assessment of sequelae, treatment, rehabilitation and follow-up, including those in communities, are often absent or insufficient, and access to them is uneven, especially in low-and middle-income countries. Appropriate training on timely identification and management of disability and bereavement for health care professionals and community workers is limited, with inadequate numbers of trained staff at all levels of care from community to hospital. Given the global distribution of meningitis, it is essential to build and strengthen health systems to ensure that they can provide the necessary care and programmatic support for everyone who needs it. The capacity of educational institutions needs to be strengthened and linkages with health care services need to be established to train health workers as well as community members in the early recognition of developmental, psychosocial and cognitive aftereffects of meningitis. This pillar applies to meningitis from any cause. The aims are to: (i) strengthen early recognition and management of sequelae from meningitis in health care and community settings; (ii) increase the availability of and access to appropriate care and support for people affected by meningitis, their families and carers. Conduct research on: (i) socioeconomic impact of sequelae on children, adults and their families/carers; (ii) effectiveness of aftercare/ support interventions in reducing impact. By 2023, studies completed and published on effectiveness of aftercare/ support interventions in reducing impact Develop and implement best practice guidelines for low-and middle-income countries on detection, monitoring and management of meningitis sequelae after discharge from hospital, at all levels of health care and in community settings, for example, schools (including disability sensitization and communication skills). By 2024, global guidelines for low-and middle-income countries in systematic detection, monitoring and management of sequelae after meningitis and, by 2026, adapted and implemented in >50% of low-and middle-income countries (to be integrated with Strategic Goal 9 guidelines) Promote community-based programmes to: (i) identify sequelae and disabilities, based on standardized instruments (especially for child development and hearing) and refer for assessment and appropriate care; (ii) provide care, support and aftercare to individuals, families and communities affected by meningitis, for example, psychosocial support. By 2028, system of community-based identification of sequelae and disabilities, and referral for assessment and care established in >50% of countries (including all targeted countries). By 2028, community services for people with long- term impairments from meningitis integrated into existing disability inclusion initiatives in >50% of countries (including all targeted countries) Map out existing services and support systems available by country for: (i) children and people with disabilities, including those with meningitis sequelae, and (ii) for families/carers of people affected by meningitis; identify barriers to access, availability, and use, with the involvement of organizations for persons with disabilities and other networks where possible, and undertake a gap analysis to improve service provision. By 2023, services and support systems mapped out for: (i) people with disabilities including meningitis sequelae; (ii) families /carers of people with meningitis who have recovered or died, with a gap analysis in >80% of countries, (including all targeted countries). By 2024, gap analysis completed and linked to Strategic Goal 13 Strengthen partnerships between government and civil society organizations, including organizations for persons with disabilities and other networks, so that people with sequelae or disabilities, their families/carers and those bereaved due to meningitis have access to quality and effective services that are in line with international human rights standards and frameworks. By 2025, strategies to facilitate access for people affected by meningitis to community-based rehabilitation and bereavement services developed and, by 2028, policies in place in >50% of countries (including all targeted countries) Provide relevant, up-to-date information to people and carers affected by meningitis about access to services for managing sequelae as well about the rights of people with disabilities guaranteed under national policies and laws and through global human rights instruments. By 2027, relevant, up-to-date information provided by media, social media, schools, community-based mechanisms, etc. to people affected by meningitis on access to services and support in >50% of countries (including all targeted countries) Advocacy can drive lasting change and makes the case for that change. Advocacy goals for meningitis include better protection against meningitis, better diagnosis and treatment and better support and aftercare for those who have experienced meningitis, and their families. Provision of general information about meningitis to the overall population and at-risk groups, improved education and training for health workers, and specific information for people who have been directly affected by meningitis, their families and their communities can all play an important role in defeating meningitis but are often lacking. Meningitis poses specific challenges in terms of information. Its rapid onset leaves little time to act, increasing the need for accurate targeted information on prevention, early management and sequelae that are appropriate for different audiences. It is frequently confused with other febrile diseases such as malaria, and may also present as sepsis or encephalitis, increasing the need for health worker resources and training. Disability is a common feature of life after meningitis, meaning that good aftercare information is essential. Effective information can make people aware of the need to seek help based on awareness of the signs and symptoms of meningitis, and to increase demand from populations for vaccination and aftercare services. Meningitis advocacy goals should be integrated into many other universal health coverage goals that are a priority for countries, including health security, promoting equal treatment and access to opportunities for those with disabilities, and reducing antimicrobial resistance. The aims of this pillar are to: (i) ensure that funders and policy-makers at the national, regional and global levels recognize that the road map to defeat meningitis is prioritized and integrated into country plans at all levels; (ii) ensure awareness, among all populations, of the symptoms, signs and consequences of meningitis so that they seek appropriate health care; (iii) ensure and raise awareness of communities about the impact of meningitis and available support after meningitis; (iv) ensure that people and communities know how to access meningitis vaccines, other prevention and support after meningitis, and that they value and demand them; (v) maintain high vaccine confidence. Raise awareness of meningitis as a health priority among funders and policy-makers through national and international champions, civil society organizations, advocacy groups and health care providers, including the disability sector. By 2020, global meningitis dashboard developed and updated regularly to show burden of meningitis, its impact and global road map progress. By 2022, meningitis and related impact included in all relevant strategic and operational plans and budgets of WHO (Global and Regional), development organizations, and donors with plans to monitor progress Identify and create synergies between key activities on strategy, implementation and communication with other initiatives at the global, regional and national levels, especially for the immunization and disability sectors. By 2020, global collaboration framework for meningitis road map developed. By 2023, an effective mechanism of coordination for technical support, resource mobilization, and partnership between immunization and disability sectors developed Build a business case for investment in vaccines, surveillance, diagnosis, and treatment of meningitis, and for the prevention and management of sequelae, as set out in the road map, that is targeted for use by policy-makers, decision-makers and funders at the global, regional and national levels including the disability sector. By 2020, have a business investment case available and promoted at the global, regional and national level to mobilize resources, with potential for adjustments accounting for progress Countries undertake needs assessment on meningitis and its impact, and create national action plans that address gaps and are aligned to the global road map. By 2022, all targeted countries have undertaken a needs assessment of meningitis and its impact. By 2024, all targeted countries have a context appropriate meningitis action plan and monitoring framework aligned to their national health strategy, budget and global road map through to 2030 Develop communications and engagement strategy and improve global recognition of World Meningitis Day and other global health dates (for example, sepsis, GBS, cerebral palsy, disability), adapt messaging to policy-makers as well as to the general public, and raise funding to promote activities that support the road map. By 2021, communications and engagement strategy developed that defines key audiences, messages, channels, drivers and barriers for policy change from a country perspective. By 2022, World Meningitis Day and related global health dates visibly endorsed by global policy-makers/funders and used by >80% of countries (including all targeted countries) to assess/promote road map progress and share learning through human interest stories and best practice around the world Undertake integrated communication programmes and activities that increase population awareness of the risk, symptoms, signs and consequences of meningitis and sepsis and of the recommended health-seeking response, and create community awareness of GBS disease and prevention. By 2023, meningitis and sepsis awareness campaigns conducted in >80% of targeted countries and integrated with existing health awareness activities Study the community understanding of the risk of meningitis, and the factors that facilitate or act as barriers to health-seeking behaviours for meningitis, and integrate actions into country plans to address the issues identified. By 2025, region-specific research published into community knowledge of meningitis and practices that facilitate or act as barriers to health-seeking behaviours for meningitis and its sequelae. By 2026, national action plans updated based on the published research Support global and national campaigns on the International Day of Persons with Disabilities to increase and raise awareness of communities about disability, and to address significant attitudinal barriers that lead to stigma and undignified treatment of people with disabilities Raise awareness of new systems for data collection on sequelae/disabilities and of available support and specialist services. By 2025, awareness raised on the International Day of Persons with Disabilities in >80% of countries (including all targeted countries) to increase awareness of communities on meningitis-related disability and on available support and specialist services Identify, encourage and support civil society organizations that do or could promote the interests of those affected by meningitis, including those with sequelae, and invite involvement in delivering the goals of the road map through their communities, engagement with national and regional authorities and international networks of civil society organizations. By 2025, citizen representation and input to national meningitis annual plans in >50% of targeted countries Study community understanding of current and new meningitis vaccines (for example, maternal immunization when available for GBS) and other preventive strategies. By 2025, research conducted and, by 2028, (depending on vaccine availability) GBS maternal vaccination promoted Develop risk and communication strategies to address issues of access, acceptance and generation of demand for vaccines Develop risk and crisis communication plans for new and existing vaccines in order to address potential inaccurate communication of adverse events. By 2023, risk and communication strategies addressing issues of vaccine access, acceptance and demand developed, integrated into national plans, and implemented in >50% of targeted countries and, by 2026, in > 80% of targeted countries